chore(docs): Updated accounts page (#12019)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs/aztec/concepts/accounts/index.md

title: Accounts
sidebar_position: 1
tags: [accounts]
---                                                                                                                                                               

Aztec has native account abstraction. Every account in Aztec is a smart contract.

> In this section, you’ll learn about Aztec’s account abstraction, Aztec accounts and address derivation, how wallets relate to accounts, and how the entrypoints are defined.

Reviewer: Should we use `’` or `'` across the board? And yes, this is a major cause for concern, right after tabs vs spaces.

## Account Abstraction (AA)

> Under the Account Abstraction, the identity of a user is usually represented by a smart contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Account abstraction generally refers to flexibility in a user's identity on-chain. For example, Bitcoin has rigid accounts that must be a private key, whereas a more flexible account might be tied to a physical passport.
```
just a thought :)

Author: Thank you, Adam! Partially incorporated it! =)

Among the account parts to be abstracted are authentication (“Who I am”), authorization (“What I am allowed to do”), replay protection, fee payment, and execution.

> Among the use cases to be unlocked by Account Abstraction are account recovery, gas sponsorship, multichain accounts, and support of signatures other than ECDSA, such as more efficient signatures (e.g. Schnorr, BLS), or more user-friendly ones (e.g. smartphone secure enclave).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some account features unlocked by account abstraction are account recovery, gas sponsorship, multi-chain accounts, and support of signatures other than ECDSA, such as more efficient signatures (e.g. Schnorr, BLS), or more user-friendly ones (e.g. smartphone secure enclave).
```
improved wording.

Just curious, what do mulit-chain accounts look like with Aztec? I haven't heard this one before.

Author: It's fair for general AA but not for Aztec AA, my bad. Removed it.

### Protocol vs application level

> AA can be implemented at the protocol level, then we call it native Account Abstraction. In this case, all the accounts on the network are smart contracts. AA can also be implemented at the smart-contract level, then we call it non-native Account Abstraction. In this case, there might be both EOAs and accounts controlled by smart contracts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
AA can be implemented at the protocol level is called native Account Abstraction. In this case, all the accounts on the network are smart contracts. AA can also be implemented at the smart-contract level, then we call it non-native Account Abstraction. In this case, there might be both EOAs and accounts controlled by smart contracts.
```

In the case of Aztec, we have native Account Abstraction.

## Aztec Account Abstraction

### Authorization abstraction and DoS attacks

> While we talk about “arbitrary verification logic” describing the intuition behind AA, the logic is usually not really arbitrary. The verification logic (i.e. what can be checked as an authorization) is limited to make the verification time fast and bounded. If it is not bounded, an attacker can flood the mempool with expensive invalid transactions clogging the network. That is the case for all chains where transaction validity is checked by the sequencer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While we talk about “arbitrary verification logic” describing the intuition behind AA, the logic is usually not really arbitrary. The verification logic (i.e. what is checked as an authorization) is limited to make the verification time fast and bounded. If it is not bounded, an attacker can flood the mempool with expensive invalid transactions, clogging the network. That is the case for all chains where transaction validity is checked by the sequencer.
```

> On Aztec, there is no limitation on verification logic. The sequencer only verifies the proof and this process is independent of the verification logic complexity.

Reviewer 3: I'm not really sure what this means. Can you expand on this idea?

> This unlocks a whole universe of new use cases and optimization of existing ones. Whenever the dapp can benefit from moving expensive computations off-chain, Aztec AA will provide a unique chance for an optimization. That is to say, on traditional chains users pay for each executed opcode, hence more complex operations (e.g. alternative signature verification) are quite expensive. In the case of Aztec, it can be moved off-chain so that it becomes almost free. The user pays for the operations in terms of client-side prover time.

Reviewer: Tx validity is still checked by the sequencer in Aztec. The point is that tx validity requires checking a client-side zkp, which has constant cost and is pretty cheap. The difference between aztec and other chains is that auth is not checked explicitly by the sequencer, but wrapped within the client's zkp.

Reviewer: > Whenever the dapp can benefit from moving expensive computations off-chain, Aztec AA will provide a unique chance for an optimization

You mean wallet instead of dapp? To be fair it's also true for dapps, but it's not AA that provides the optimization, just the fact that we have client-side execution.

Author: hmm if we are talking about verification logic – are we talking about wallets only? Or dapps (that are not wallets) can also deal with the abstracted verification logic on their own?

Reviewer: Dapps can also leverage client-side execution, for sure. But it's not AA that enables it, it's just the fact that private execution happens client-side.

> This unlocks a whole universe of new use cases and optimization of existing ones. Whenever the dapp can benefit from moving expensive computations off-chain, Aztec AA will provide a unique chance for an optimization. That is to say, on traditional chains users pay for each executed opcode, hence more complex operations (e.g. alternative signature verification) are quite expensive. In the case of Aztec, it can be moved off-chain so that it becomes almost free. The user pays for the operations in terms of client-side prover time.

Reviewer 3: This is true by the nature of client-side execution of private functions, not necessarily AA, right?

Couple of examples:
- Multisig contract with an arbitrary number of parties that can verify any number of signatures for free.
- Oracle contract with an arbitrary number of data providers that can verify any number of data entries for free.

## Aztec account

> Aztec has no concept of EOAs (Externally Owned Accounts). Every account is implemented as a contract.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Smart contracts on Aztec are represented by an "address", which is a hexadecimal number that uniquely represents an entity on the Aztec network. An address is derived by hashing information specific to the entity represented by the address. This information includes contract bytecode and the public keys used in private execution for encryption and nullification. This means addresses are deterministic. 

Aztec has no concept of EOAs (Externally Owned Accounts). Every account is implemented as a contract.
```
Some clarifying context before diving in

### Entrypoints

Account contracts usually have a specific function called `entrypoint`. It serves as the interface for interaction with the smart contract and can be called by external users or other smart contracts.

> An `entrypoint` function receives the actions to be carried out and an authentication payload. In pseudocode:

Reviewer: We should add something about fee payment in the pseudocode below

        enqueueCall(to, data, value, gasLimit);
```

> Read more about how to write an account contract [here](../../../tutorials/codealong/contract_tutorials/write_accounts_contract.md).

Author: To be removed.

For example, a lottery contract, where at some point a prize needs to be paid out to its winners. This `pay` action does not require authentication and does not need to be executed by any user in particular, so anyone could submit a transaction that defines the lottery contract itself as `origin` and `pay` as `entrypoint` function.

For an example of this behavior see our [non_contract_account test](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/master/yarn-project/end-to-end/src/e2e_non_contract_account.test.ts) and the [SignerLess wallet](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/master/yarn-project/aztec.js/src/wallet/signerless_wallet.ts) implementation. Notice that the Signerless wallet doesn't invoke an `entrypoint` function of an account contract but instead invokes the target contract function directly.

:::info
Entrypoints for the following cases:

- If no contract `entrypoint` is used `msg_sender` is set to `Field.max`.
- In a private to public `entrypoint`, `msg_sender` is the contract making the private to public call.

> - When calling the `entrypoint` on an account contract, `msg_sender` is set to the account contract address.

Reviewer: Have you confirmed these?

:::

### Account contracts and wallets

> Account contracts are tightly coupled to the wallet software that users use to interact with the protocol. Dapps submit to the wallet software one or more function calls to be executed (e.g. "call swap in X contract"), and the wallet encodes and authenticates the request as a valid payload for the user's account contract. The account contract then validates the request encoded and authenticated by the wallet, and executes the function calls requested by the dapp.

Reviewer: Non-native speaker question: _authenticate_ here is used to mean "sign", but I've usually seen it used to mean "verify"...?

### Account initialization

> When a user wants to interact with the network, as their first action, they need to deploy their account contract (analogous to setting up a wallet with a seed phrase in an EOA).

Reviewer: Account contracts only need to be initialized, not necessarily publicly deployed (the distinction is important)

However, this is not required when sitting on the receiving end. The user address can be deterministically derived from their encryption public key and the account contract they intend to deploy. So that the funds can be sent to an account that hasn’t been deployed yet.

Users will need to pay transaction fees in order to deploy their account contract. This can be done by sending fee juice to their account contract address (which can be derived deterministically, as mentioned above), so that the account has funds to pay for its own deployment. Alternatively, the fee can be paid for by another account, using [fee abstraction](#fee-abstraction).

## What is account address

Address is derived from the [address keys](keys.md#address-keys). While the AddressPublicKey is an elliptic curve point of the form (x,y), the address is its x coordinate.

> The address y coordinate can be derived when needed using the formula y = sqrt(x^3 - 17), coming from the [Grumpkin elliptic curve](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-connect/blob/9374aae687ec5ea01adeb651e7b9ab0d69a1b33b/markdown/specs/aztec-connect/src/primitives.md). For x to be legit as an address there should exist a corresponding y that satisfies the aforementioned equation: any field element cannot work as an address.

Reviewer: Is this the right place to go so deep in technical explanation?

Author: Fair point =(

### Complete address

Because of the contract address derivation scheme you can check that a given set of public [keys](keys.md) corresponds to a given address just by trying to recompute it.

You can check that a given set of public keys corresponds to a given address by recomputing it, thanks to the contract address derivation scheme.

Since this is commonly needed when sending a [note](../concepts/storage/notes.md) to an account, we coined the term complete address for the collection of:
- all the user's public keys,
- [partial address](keys.md#address-keys),
- contract address.

> Once the complete address is shared with the sender, the sender can use the public keys and partial address to check that the complete address is correct, and then send the notes to that address.

Reviewer: Does this still apply? I understand that we tweaked addresses so they can act as encryption public keys, so the recipient does not need to share the complete address with the sender in order to receive encrypted notes.

Author: According to Mike, we still refer to the complete key as a valid Aztec creature.

p.s. the wording is mine, the sense is Mike's

Reviewer 4: Alice only needs to share the `address` with Bob, if she wants Bob to send her something, encrypted.
Alice needs the so-called "complete address" when she comes to spend her note(s), because she must prove the nullifier key inside her address is correct.
Bob needs Alice's "complete address" if Alice has granted him "transferFrom" permissions; i.e. if Alice has given Bob an authwit. When Bob calls a "transferFrom" function (for example), the token contract will in turn call Alice's account contract to validate the authwit. Under these circumstances, Bob needs Alice's "complete address".

### Authorizing actions

Account contracts are also expected, though not required by the protocol, to implement a set of methods for authorizing actions on behalf of the user. During a transaction, a contract may call into the account contract and request the user authorization for a given action, identified by a hash. This pattern is used, for instance, for transferring tokens from an account that is not the caller.

When executing a private function, this authorization is checked by requesting an authentication witness from the execution oracle, which is usually a signed message. Authentication Witness is a scheme for authenticating actions on Aztec, so users can allow third-parties (e.g. protocols or other users) to execute an action on their behalf.

The user's [Private eXecution Environment (PXE)](../concepts/pxe/index.md) is responsible for storing these auth witnesses and returning them to the requesting account contract. Auth witnesses can belong to the current user executing the local transaction, or to another user who shared it out-of-band.

> However, during a public function execution, it is not possible to retrieve a value from the local [oracle](../../smart_contracts/oracles/index.md). To support authorizations in public functions, account contracts should save in contract storage what actions have been pre-authorized by their owner.

Reviewer: I believe they are now stored in a public authwit registry, not on the account contract storage

:::

## Nonce and fee abstraction

Beyond the authentication logic abstraction, there are nonce abstraction and fee abstraction.

### Nonce abstraction

Nonce is a sequentially increasing number (transaction-over-transaction) and it is utilized for replay protection (i.e. preventing users from executing a transaction more than once and unauthorized reordering).

In particular, nonce management defines what it means for a transaction to be canceled, the rules of transaction ordering, and replay protection. In Ethereum, nonce is enshrined into the protocol. For example, to cancel a transaction, its sender should send another transaction with the same nonce but with a higher transaction fee.

> On the Aztec network, nonce is abstracted i.e. if a developer wants to customize it, they get to decide how they handle replay protection, transaction cancellation, as well as ordering. It’s mostly relevant to those building wallets. For example, a developer can design a wallet that allows sending big transactions with very low priority fees because the transactions are not time sensitive (i.e. the preference is that a transaction is cheap and doesn’t matter if it is slow). If one tries to apply this logic today on Ethereum (under sequential nonces), when they send a large, slow transaction they can’t send any other transactions until that first large, slow transaction is processed.

Reviewer: I'd add a mention of how cancellation can be implemented using nullifiers, otherwise it's a bit vague

Author: Can you describe it please? I am not sure I know it.

Reviewer: You add logic in your account contract to emit a nullifier you directly control via an argument (eg "emit 5 as part of this tx"). If you want to cancel that tx before mined, you can send another tx with higher gas price that emits the same nullifier. The cancellation tx then invalidates the original one, since nullifiers cannot be repeated.

### Fee abstraction

> It doesn’t have to be the transaction sender who pays the transaction fees. Wallets or dapp developers can choose any payment logic they want using a paymaster.

Reviewer: I'd add a mention of how the "negotiation" between the user account contract and the paymaster works, in that the paymaster is invoked during private execution and set as the fee payer.

        enqueueCall(to, data, value, gasLimit);
```

A request for executing an action requires:
- The `origin` contract to execute as the first step.
- The initial function to call (usually `entrypoint`).
- The arguments (which encode the private and public calls to run as well as any signatures).

Read more about how to write an account contract [here](../../../developers/tutorials/codealong/contract_tutorials/write_accounts_contract.md).

### Non-standard entrypoints

> Since the `entrypoint` interface is not enshrined, there is nothing that differentiates an account contract from an application one. This allows implementing functions that do not need to be called by any particular user and are just intended to advance the state of a contract.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since the `entrypoint` interface is not enshrined, there is nothing that differentiates an account contract from an application contract. This allows implementing functions that can be called by any user and are just intended to advance the state of a contract.
```

> For example, a lottery contract, where at some point a prize needs to be paid out to its winners. This `pay` action does not require authentication and does not need to be executed by any user in particular, so anyone could submit a transaction that defines the lottery contract itself as `origin` and `pay` as `entrypoint` function.

Reviewer 3: You should add a note that the contract still needs to define how fees are paid, since they won't be paid by an account contract.

- In a private to public `entrypoint`, `msg_sender` is the contract making the private to public call.
- When calling the `entrypoint` on an account contract, `msg_sender` is set to the account contract address.
:::

### Account contracts and wallets

Account contracts are tightly coupled to the wallet software that users use to interact with the protocol. Dapps submit to the wallet software one or more function calls to be executed (e.g. "call swap in X contract"), and the wallet encodes the request as a valid payload for the user's account contract. The account contract then validates the request encoded by the wallet, and executes the function calls requested by the dapp.

### Account initialization

When a user wants to interact with the network, as their first action, they need to deploy their account contract (analogous to setting up a wallet with a seed phrase in an EOA).

However, this is not required when sitting on the receiving end. The user address can be deterministically derived from their encryption public key and the account contract they intend to deploy. So that the funds can be sent to an account that hasn't been deployed yet.

> Users will need to pay transaction fees in order to deploy their account contract. This can be done by sending fee juice to their account contract address (which can be derived deterministically, as mentioned above), so that the account has funds to pay for its own deployment. Alternatively, the fee can be paid for by another account, using [fee abstraction](#fee-abstraction).

Reviewer 3: It would be good to link to the fees docs that @jzaki is working on when they are ready.

## What is account address

> Address is derived from the [address keys](keys.md#address-keys). While the AddressPublicKey is an elliptic curve point of the form (x,y) on the [Grumpkin elliptic curve](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-connect/blob/9374aae687ec5ea01adeb651e7b9ab0d69a1b33b/markdown/specs/aztec-connect/src/primitives.md), the address is its x coordinate. The corresponding y coordinate can be derived if needed. For x to be legit as an address there should exist a corresponding y that satisfies the curve equation: any field element cannot work as an address.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Address is derived from the [address keys](keys.md#address-keys). While the AddressPublicKey is an elliptic curve point of the form (x,y) on the [Grumpkin elliptic curve](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-connect/blob/9374aae687ec5ea01adeb651e7b9ab0d69a1b33b/markdown/specs/aztec-connect/src/primitives.md), the address is its x coordinate. The corresponding y coordinate can be derived if needed. For x to be a legitimate address, address there should exist a corresponding y that satisfies the curve equation. Any field element cannot work as an address.
```

### Complete address

> Because of the contract address derivation scheme you can check that a given set of public [keys](keys.md) corresponds to a given address just by trying to recompute it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because of the contract address derivation scheme, you can check that a given set of public [keys](keys.md) corresponds to a given address by trying to recompute it.
```

You can check that a given set of public keys corresponds to a given address by recomputing it, thanks to the contract address derivation scheme.

Since this is commonly needed when sending a [note](../concepts/storage/notes.md) to an account, we coined the term complete address for the collection of:
- all the user's public keys,
- [partial address](keys.md#address-keys),
- contract address.

Once the complete address is shared with the sender, the sender can use the public keys and partial address to check that the complete address is correct, and then send the notes to that address.

> ### Authorizing actions

Reviewer 3: I dont think this "Authorizing actions" section makes sense nested in the "What is account address" section

Author: Do you think it should be a separate section after?

In particular, nonce management defines what it means for a transaction to be canceled, the rules of transaction ordering, and replay protection. In Ethereum, nonce is enshrined into the protocol. For example, to cancel a transaction, its sender should send another transaction with the same nonce but with a higher transaction fee.

On the Aztec network, nonce is abstracted i.e. if a developer wants to customize it, they get to decide how they handle replay protection, transaction cancellation, as well as ordering. It's mostly relevant to those building wallets. For example, a developer can design a wallet that allows sending big transactions with very low priority fees because the transactions are not time sensitive (i.e. the preference is that a transaction is cheap and doesn't matter if it is slow). If one tries to apply this logic today on Ethereum (under sequential nonces), when they send a large, slow transaction they can't send any other transactions until that first large, slow transaction is processed.

### Fee abstraction

> It doesn't have to be the transaction sender who pays the transaction fees. Wallets or dapp developers can choose any payment logic they want using a paymaster.

Author: I will add the link when James merge the PR!

### Account initialization

When a user wants to interact with the network, as their first action, they need to deploy their account contract (analogous to setting up a wallet with a seed phrase in an EOA).

However, this is not required when sitting on the receiving end. The user address can be deterministically derived from their encryption public key and the account contract they intend to deploy. So that the funds can be sent to an account that hasn't been deployed yet.

Users will need to pay transaction fees in order to deploy their account contract. This can be done by sending fee juice to their account contract address (which can be derived deterministically, as mentioned above), so that the account has funds to pay for its own deployment. Alternatively, the fee can be paid for by another account, using [fee abstraction](#fee-abstraction).

## What is account address

> Address is derived from the [address keys](keys.md#address-keys). While the AddressPublicKey is an elliptic curve point of the form (x,y) on the [Grumpkin elliptic curve](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-connect/blob/9374aae687ec5ea01adeb651e7b9ab0d69a1b33b/markdown/specs/aztec-connect/src/primitives.md), the address is its x coordinate. The corresponding y coordinate can be derived if needed. For x to be a legitimate address, address there should exist a corresponding y that satisfies the curve equation. Any field element cannot work as an address.

Reviewer 3: Is there a case where I'd want to derive the y coordinate?

### Account contracts and wallets

> Account contracts are tightly coupled to the wallet software that users use to interact with the protocol. Dapps submit to the wallet software one or more function calls to be executed (e.g. "call swap in X contract"), and the wallet encodes the request as a valid payload for the user's account contract. The account contract then validates the request encoded by the wallet, and executes the function calls requested by the dapp.

Reviewer: I'd still mention that the wallet "signs" the payload, not just encodes it

Take as an example the transaction cancellation logic. It can be done through managing nullifiers. Even though we usually refer to a nullifier as a creature utilized to consume a note, in essence, a nullifier is an emitted value whose uniqueness is guaranteed by the protocol. If we want to cancel a transaction before it was mined, we can send another transaction with higher gas price that emits the same nullifier (i.e. nullifier with the same value, for example, 5). The second transaction will invalidate the original one, since nullifiers cannot be repeated.

Nonce abstraction is mostly relevant to those building wallets. For example, a developer can design a wallet that allows sending big transactions with very low priority fees because the transactions are not time sensitive (i.e. the preference is that a transaction is cheap and doesn't matter if it is slow). If one tries to apply this logic today on Ethereum (under sequential nonces), when they send a large, slow transaction they can't send any other transactions until that first large, slow transaction is processed.

### Fee abstraction

> It doesn't have to be the transaction sender who pays the transaction fees. Wallets or dapp developers can choose any payment logic they want using a paymaster. To learn more about fees on Aztec – check [this page](../fees.md).

Reviewer 3: When I run `yarn build` on my machine, this link (../fees.md) is broken. I don't see this file on this branch, I think you need to merge it in from `master`.

Author: Yes, this link doesn't work because the file fees was added after i created my local branch. I tried to pull main branch today towards by local branch but it also pulled an update for my local branch, and i cancelled it, because it mixed up the previous accounts page and the new one.

Reviewer 3: completing the merge fixed it
